docs/cli.rst, before:

.. highlight:: none

Use the command line tool
=========================


Basic Usage
-----------

::

    usage: dayone_export [--output FILE] [opts] journal

    Export Day One entries using a Jinja template

    positional arguments:
      journal             path to Day One journal package

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help          show this help message and exit
      --output FILE       file to write (default print to stdout)
      --format FMT        output format (default guess from output file extension)
      --template NAME     name or file of template to use
      --template-dir DIR  location of templates (default ~/.dayone_export)
      --tags TAGS         export entries with these comma-separated tags. Tag
                          'any' has a special meaning.
      --after DATE        export entries published after this date
      --reverse           display in reverse chronological order
      --autobold          autobold first lines (titles) of posts
      --nl2br             convert each new line to a <br>

    If the Day One package has photos, you may need to copy the "photos" folder
    from the package into the same directory as the output file.

Use a custom template
---------------------

Use the ``--template`` option to specify a custom template.

For information on how to create templates, see :ref:`templates`.


Change the default template
---------------------------

You can override the default template by creating a ``default.html`` file
and placing it in the folder ``~/.dayone_export``.

You can also create default templates of other types in a similar manner.
For example, ``default.tex`` would be a default LaTeX template.
The default markdown template should be called `default.md`.

The program uses the extension of the output file to determine which
default template to use. If there is no output file, use the
``--format`` option to specify the format.

If you wish to use a directory other than ``~/.dayone_export``, as the
location for default templates, you can use the ``--template-dir`` option.

Filter by tag
-------------

Use the ``--tags`` option with a comma-separated list of tags to include.

If you use the option ``--tags any``, then any entry with at least one tag
will be included.

Limit export to recent entries
------------------------------

Use the ``--after`` option to only export entries after a certain date.

For best results, use some kind of
standard form for the date (e.g. ``2012-03-04``).

Markdown options
----------------

The ``--autobold`` option will convert the first line of each post into a heading,
as long as it is relatively short (similar to the way Day One optionally can)

The ``--nl2br`` option will insert a ``<br>`` tag after each new line.


Link to or embed photos
-----------------------

The default html template refers to photos by their relative names.
To show the photos in the output file, you will need to copy the ``photos``
directory from inside the `Journal.dayone` package into the same directory
as the output html file.

There is an alternate template which embeds photos directly into the html
file as base64-encoded images. To use this template, use the option
``--template imgbase64.html``.

Commit message:

Allow output to be split into multiple files by date.
The output filename is now run through strftime to allow multi-file
output.

docs/cli.rst, after:

.. highlight:: none

Use the command line tool
=========================


Basic Usage
-----------

::

    usage: dayone_export [--output FILE] [opts] journal

    Export Day One entries using a Jinja template

    positional arguments:
      journal             path to Day One journal package

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help          show this help message and exit
      --output FILE       file to write (default print to stdout) or filename template
      --format FMT        output format (default guess from output file extension)
      --template NAME     name or file of template to use
      --template-dir DIR  location of templates (default ~/.dayone_export)
      --tags TAGS         export entries with these comma-separated tags. Tag
                          'any' has a special meaning.
      --after DATE        export entries published after this date
      --reverse           display in reverse chronological order
      --autobold          autobold first lines (titles) of posts
      --nl2br             convert each new line to a <br>

    If the Day One package has photos, you may need to copy the "photos" folder
    from the package into the same directory as the output file.

Use a custom template
---------------------

Use the ``--template`` option to specify a custom template.

For information on how to create templates, see :ref:`templates`.


Change the default template
---------------------------

You can override the default template by creating a ``default.html`` file
and placing it in the folder ``~/.dayone_export``.

You can also create default templates of other types in a similar manner.
For example, ``default.tex`` would be a default LaTeX template.
The default markdown template should be called `default.md`.

The program uses the extension of the output file to determine which
default template to use. If there is no output file, use the
``--format`` option to specify the format.

If you wish to use a directory other than ``~/.dayone_export``, as the
location for default templates, you can use the ``--template-dir`` option.

Filter by tag
-------------

Use the ``--tags`` option with a comma-separated list of tags to include.

If you use the option ``--tags any``, then any entry with at least one tag
will be included.

Limit export to recent entries
------------------------------

Use the ``--after`` option to only export entries after a certain date.

For best results, use some kind of
standard form for the date (e.g. ``2012-03-04``).

Markdown options
----------------

The ``--autobold`` option will convert the first line of each post into a heading,
as long as it is relatively short (similar to the way Day One optionally can)

The ``--nl2br`` option will insert a ``<br>`` tag after each new line.


Link to or embed photos
-----------------------

The default html template refers to photos by their relative names.
To show the photos in the output file, you will need to copy the ``photos``
directory from inside the `Journal.dayone` package into the same directory
as the output html file.

There is an alternate template which embeds photos directly into the html
file as base64-encoded images. To use this template, use the option
``--template imgbase64.html``.

Template filenames and grouping
-------------------------------

The ``--output`` option specifies the output filename if you
want something other than stdout.  

It also has another feature: you can include strftime-style formatting codes,
in which case multiple files will be produced, each containing the journal entries 
with timestamps that result in the same filename.

Examples:

  ``--output journal_%Y_%m.md`` will produces monthly files named journal_2013_02.md etc.

  ``--output diary_%a.html`` will produce a separate file for each weekday.
